---
layout: default
title: Rising Tuition and American Students
category: portfolio
modal-id: 3
img: school.PNG
alt: Various information about the effects of rising tuition on American students 
client: Berkeley Coursework
application: Tuition and Students 
project-date: January 2017 - May 2017
languages:
- R
- UNIX
concepts:
- Data Visualization
- R
- Rising Tuition
- Longitudinal Study
- Data Cleaning
tools:
- R: Data Computing Package
- R: GGPlot
- R: TidyR
stack:
- Windows
- Excel
- R
- UNIX
---

### Project Description

Our research examines the effect of tuition rates on student behavior and examines their rise over the course of 25 years. Independently of inflation, tuition appears to be on the rise from 1987 through 2012. This project demonstrates that the entire nation and college-aged generation has been affected by this as students have massive loan debts to pay off as well as can see the trends that are currently in place that will affect the next generation. 

Both private and public schools have raised their tuition to the highest levels in the country's history. The country has seen inflation-independent increases across all facets of the post-secondary education system. While the smallest increase may have been from schools like historically black colleges and Hispanic serving institutions, these schools still saw massive increases as well, that affected large number of students. 

Yet, these figures depict that despite rising tuition costs, students are still attending school as it is necessary to compete in the modern era. Student behavior has failed to change in terms of applications, retention rate or major selection. As we have previously suggested, this may be due to a widening skills premium between high school graduates and college graduates. 

To investigate these trends in tuition costs, we turned to a data set provided by the National Center for Education Statistics: The Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS). The IPEDS is a longitudinal study containing a wide range of data pertaining to characteristics of higher education institutions in the United States.

### Project Links:

Paper Link: https://drive.google.com/open?id=1elHWHejB5Ks0kuJOOBkS2hZ3q7FpmcZA

### Scope

I worked on a team of three developers that worked directly with the dataset to answer the following questions.

1) How have real tuition costs evolved nationwide across 4-year public, 4-year private, 2-year public and 2-year private higher education institutions?

2) Have the changes to real tuition costs had a significant impact on student behaviors such as:

- The number of students applying to colleges
- The percent of full time students continuing their studies (i.e. retention rates)
- The majors which students choose to pursue



### Challenges Overcame

This was my first large-scale project built entirely in R. This was also my first time working with a large longitudinal study.

We also had difficulty in choosing what types of questions we should explore as there was a plethora of data available on all types of problems in education. Parsing a big dataset like this has the potential to answer so many education questions.

### Accomplishments

Our research found that these figures have illustrated that even in the face of rising tuition costs, students have, in general, not adjusted their behavior in terms of applications, continuing their studies or selecting their major. 

As we have previously suggested, this may be due to a widening skills premium between high school graduates and college graduates. 

However, it remains to be seen if there will be a breaking point at which the cost of tuition becomes prohibitive to a majority of prospective students and how student behaviors could react if tuition costs continue to rise past this hypothetical threshold.
