---
layout: default
title: Honda ParkSmart
category: portfolio
modal-id: 7
img: ParkSmartNews.JPG
alt: Brief Summary of ParkSmart Project 
client: Honda
application: ParkSmart
project-date: February 2019 - May 2019
languages:
- Python
- React
concepts:
- Neural Networks
- Big Data
- Front End
- UI/UX
tools:
- Git
- Google Maps API
stack:
- Datahub
- Python
- React
---

### Project Description

ParkSmart is a machine learning-based ​parking guidance system that provides users with a way to find nearby street parking, based on a predictive tool that uses historical data to identify locations where parking is likely to be available. 

ParkSmart provides turn-by-turn directions to the best parking spots around a user’s inputted destination and helps drivers save time and money, through advanced statistical methods and data science techniques. 

Using neural network-based time series and forecast models, ParkSmart is designed to predict which zones of Columbus, Ohio, have the highest levels of open parking based on past vehicle trip logs and historical parking meter data. 

### Project Links:

Paper Link: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1ulj4wHVj9-MSbznottQSHHAVLYTFS4jr/view?usp=sharing

PowerPoint Link: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1rWWENigHkIi_0v_FNymo20H6EHfvz6nb/view?usp=sharing


### Contributions

ParkSmart was created by a team of Data Science, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science undergraduates at UC Berkeley and developed in collaboration with Honda and the city of Columbus, Ohio.  

The data was provided by both Honda and Columbus together, while Honda provided some additional mentorship. 

### Challenges Overcame

This project was a tidal wave of advanced concepts and technologies that I have only been previously exposed to minimally. 

I worked with time series neural network, web scraping meter data, front end and backend integration, alongside various research about the problem and the behavioral psychology of driving.

### Accomplishments

ParkSmart can predict an available spot with 85% accuracy and can help ​save Columbus drivers an average of 4.5 minutes on each driving trip, nearly 1.2 kilometers of driving at the end of their trips and prevent about 287 grams of carbon dioxide from being polluted into the atmosphere, per trip. ​

