---
layout: default
title: Topic Modeling Death Row Inmates' Last Words
category: portfolio
modal-id: 3
img: deathrow.JPG
alt: An Analysis of Religion and Performance in Inmate’s Last Statements
client: Berkeley Coursework
application: The Warden as the Bringer of Death
project-date: August 2016 - December 2016
languages:
- Python
- JavaScript
concepts:
- Natural Language Processing
- Topic Modeling
- Web Scraping/APIs
- Fan Identification
tools:
- D3.js
- VOSviewer
- Sum Up
- Python
---

### Project Description

This project uses machine learning and natural language processing to explore the topic of death and the performance of death in the controlled context of prison by looking at the last words of Texas inmates. Our research focuses on the relationship inmates have with religious figures before their death. We hypothesized that certainty of immediate death makes you reflect on the same values and look to a common religious figure to transport you into your next stage of being. Thus, the question became, what do we think about in our final moments and who do we look to as we close out our lives?

To answer this, we created a dataset based on the last statements of death row inmates in the state of Texas, published on the website of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice. By parsing the website, we scraped the information and were able to develop a dataset with various features relating to information about each execution, including personal information, such as the names, ages, birth dates, genders and education levels, as well as the execution dates, races, counties where each crime was committed and information about the crime. As an example, on July 12, 1982, Charlie Brooks Jr.’s last statement was “I, at this very moment, have absolutely no fear of what may happen to this body. My fear is for Allah, God only, who has at this moment the only power to determine if I should live or die...”

Ultimately, in our analysis we found that the role of the warden to be of great importance when considering the act of the executed's final words. By being placed in such a role, a prison's warden becomes god-like to the inmates. In their final moments, alongside their religious beliefs, these people address their warden in a performatory manner. As a result, the warden, who serves as a transitional character during the execution, bringing people from life to death, provides solace to the one being executed.

### Project Links:

Paper Link: https://drive.google.com/file/d/10t6FmOj9gMUnx5Ccf3LyZnEdK3vGWoab/view?usp=sharing

PowerPoint Link: https://drive.google.com/open?id=12uRk92VJALuSBry2Cf7CVSSFYGWjqkwN6YfkwWdBYOM


### Contributions

This project was created for a course on Analyzing Cultural Data and created alongside a team of fellow undergraduates at UC Berkeley. As the only Data Science major on the team, I was tasked with analyzing a majority of the data and exploring the dataset as a whole for trends.

This was one of my first large scale projects with such data.

### Challenges Overcame

This project included a large amount of advanced concepts and technologies that I had only been previously exposed to minimally. 

Alongside working with a difficult dataset, it was difficult to work with natural language processing and to topic model the dataset. Thus I had to explore this dataset with various different methods, alongside various research about the problem and the behavioral psychology of death and prison.

### Accomplishments

We were able to create various segmentations between the final thoughts of last row inmates. While the main conclusion was the similarity word choice when referring to the warden and god, we also found that there was no real difference in the final thoughts of people of different ages, ethnic backgrounds and times spent in prison. We also achieved unexpected results.
