---
layout: default
title: Relationships Between Fandoms in American Professional Sport
category: portfolio
modal-id: 4
img: twitt3r.PNG
alt: Trial in Data Visualization and Art
client: Berkeley Coursework
application: Twitter Data Project
project-date: August 2016 - December 2016
languages:
- Python
- Java
- JavaScript
concepts:
- Data Visualization
- Web Scraping/APIs
- Fan Identification
tools:
- D3.js
- Twitter API
- Python
- Java
---

### Project Description

This project explores the relationships between the fanbases of the 123 American professional sports teams through a network analysis of the shared followers between the Twitter accounts of each set of two teams. After a month of web-scraping, a database containing all of the follower identification numbers of each Major League Baseball, National Football League, National Basketball Association and National Hockey League team was created. 

Generally, many of the fanbases seemed to be related based on geographic proximity to one another as well as by seemed to exist in clusters based on each sport. Other factors, such as the performance and “brand name” of particular teams, appeared to prevalent in the dataset as well. Various visualizations were created in order to depict these relationships.


### Project Links:

Paper Link: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1om6fjft4Z1o0XLOKxthLwRbItVIupM0X/view?usp=sharing

PowerPoint Link: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1pRYgVJcE9-9i66h-YPz2LCQWRejkZaCW/view?usp=sharing

### Challenges Overcame

Considering what it meant to be a team's fan, I used the list of followers of a particular account on Twitter to serve as a proxy measure for sports fan or team identification. Followers, of a particular team on the social network, would typically be a fan or identify with the group in some way. To examine such a relationship, I looked at the set of followers in common between two particular
sports teams. Two teams that have a strong connection between their fan bases, will show off this relationship through having similar followers on social media websites, like Twitter.

To find these relationships, I started by developing and running a Python script that returned a list of the identification numbers of each follower of each professional sports team in North America’s National Hockey League (NHL), National Basketball Association (NBA), Major League Baseball (MLB) and the National Football League (NFL). These are leagues are known as the Big Four and often have multiple teams in the same city. 

As a result of the Twitter API’s rate limit, I was only able to return seventy-five thousand identification numbers every fifteen minutes. These identification numbers correlate to a unique Twitter user. As an example, the unique identification number of the user ‘@DerekTopper,’ my personal account, is ‘424502554.’ This number is non-changing and bound to my account. To put the task in perspective, there are 123 professional sports teams in the Big Four, as of 2016, including the recently announced Las Vegas Golden Knights and scraping all of the followers for the Los Angeles Lakers, with 5.35 million followers, at the time of scraping, took nearly eighteen hours to complete. The runtime of the scraping of the whole dataset took 416 hours, or nearly two-and-a-half weeks.

Each list, of follower identification numbers, was then manually cleaned and converted to a text file, under the .txt format. Statistically, the database
contained nearly 125,000,000 entries spread across the 123 teams, for an average of just over one million followers per team. 

Once I had such a database, I was able to run a Java algorithm that I developed to find the number of raw followers in common between each set of two teams. This intersection code allowed me to examine the shared followers between teams and draw relationships as a result.

Once I had these figures, I used Mike Bostock’s D3.js program, which was also a new tool for me, to create different visualizations to identify trends in the dataset.

### Accomplishments

My biggest personal accomplishment was conquering the my first large-scale data science project and learning to incorporate a variety of new tools. 

I have used this project in other analyses as it has allowed me to compare two teams with each other and allows me to evaluate the fan similarity between two teams.
