---
layout: default
title: The Grammar of Attraction in Online Dating
category: portfolio
modal-id: 8
img: 1grammar.png
alt: The Grammar of Attraction - An Analysis of Poor Spelling, Grammar, Slang and Emoji Use on Online Dating Response Rates
client: Experiment Classes
application: The Grammar of Attraction
project-date: 2021
languages:
- Python
concepts:
- Experiments
tools:
- Plenty of Fish
stack:
- Amazon MTurk
---
### Project Links

Paper Link: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1eIvHc--64iqVl7UJVs_J5AgQz9ycNu6K/view

Presentation Link: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1Q9zhjbzV0z_v0QLvySxT4pKopSXvtMFJ/view

### Project Description

The paper titled "The Grammar of Attraction: An Analysis of the Effect of Poor Spelling, Grammar, Internet Slang and Emoji Use on Online Dating Response Rates" explores the impact of grammatical mistakes on online dating outcomes. The study conducted an experiment on the dating platform Plenty of Fish, where artificial profiles were created to send messages to potential matches. The messages varied in terms of grammar, spelling, internet slang, and excessive use of emojis. The researchers found a causal effect of grammatical errors on dating outcomes, although the results did not achieve statistical significance.

Previous research has shown that individuals judge their romantic interest in a partner based on spelling and grammar in messages. Women, in particular, considered poor grammar and spelling as a major turnoff on online dating profiles. Building on this, the study aimed to investigate the effects of grammar and spelling in an introductory message on the response rate.

The experiment involved creating profiles on Plenty of Fish with consistent information except for the treatment factors. These profiles sent introductory messages with different types of grammatical errors. Multiple profiles and locations were used to minimize the influence of other variables. The results showed that the control message with proper spelling and grammar had a higher response rate compared to the treatment group, indicating the significant impact of these factors on message response rates.

The study also discusses the importance of profile pictures and text descriptions in online dating. It highlights that language errors on profiles negatively affect perceptions of attraction and dating intention. While previous research has examined the content of initial messages, little scholarship has focused on the effects of language errors in this context. The study aims to fill this gap and determine the extent to which these errors influence attraction.

The researchers selected the dating app Plenty of Fish for their experiment due to its messaging feature and the ability to contact users without matching. They created five different messages, including a control message with proper English and four treatment messages with varying types of errors. Additionally, profiles were created with consistent information and generated photos to eliminate confounding variables.

To validate their selections, the researchers used Amazon Mechanical Turk to assess the realism of images, attractiveness, and the realism of the messages. The results confirmed that the images were realistic, had similar levels of attractiveness, and the treatment messages were considered fairly realistic by participants.

In conclusion, the study found that grammatical errors have a significant impact on message response rates in online dating. Poor spelling, grammar, internet slang, and excessive use of emojis decrease the likelihood of receiving a response. The research emphasizes the importance of paying attention to language accuracy in online dating communication to enhance dating outcomes.
