---
layout: default
title: PyLabel Python Package (Capstone)
category: portfolio
modal-id: 1
img: 1capstone.png
alt: PyLabel
client: PyLabel
application: Transform, analyze, and visualize computer vision annotations
project-date: Fall 2021
languages:
- Python
concepts:
- Computer Vision Image Annotations
tools:
- COCO, YOLO, VOC formats
stack:
- Jupyter Notebooks
---
### Project Links

Presentation Link: https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-3KINK8gjOVkBDx3x6wnkz0YO9m6U-kK/view?usp=drive_link

ISchool Website: https://www.ischool.berkeley.edu/projects/2021/pylabel

PyPi: https://pypi.org/project/pylabel/

### Project Description

For my MIDS Capstone Project, in Fall 2021, called PyLabel, is a Python package developed by a team consisting of Alexander Heaton and Derek Topper. The project aims to assist computer vision practitioners in preparing labeled image datasets for deep learning models.

PyLabel offers several core features, including a labeling tool called PyLabeler, which runs in a Jupyter notebook. This tool allows users to view, edit, or add annotations to an image dataset. It supports manual annotation as well as AI-assisted labeling using a pre-trained model.

Another significant feature of PyLabel is its ability to convert between different labeling formats such as YOLO, COCO, and VOC. This feature enables users to translate bounding box annotations between these formats with a single line of code.

The package also provides functionalities for dataset analysis, allowing users to store annotations in a pandas dataframe and perform analysis on image datasets. It facilitates dataset splitting into train, test, and validation sets with stratification to ensure consistent class distribution.

PyLabel includes visualization capabilities, allowing users to render images from their dataset with overlaid bounding boxes to verify the accuracy of annotations.

The project has been installed nearly 170,000 times. Sample Jupyter notebooks demonstrating PyLabel's functionality are available, covering topics such as annotation format conversion, dataset splitting, and labeling tool demonstrations.

PyLabel was developed as the capstone project for the Master of Information and Data Science (MIDS) program at the UC Berkeley School of Information. The project's goal is to provide a versatile and user-friendly tool for image dataset preparation in computer vision applications. Feedback and questions can be addressed by creating an issue on the project's GitHub repository.


